A director’s objective should be making
the audience believe anything – no matter
how fantastical – that’s on the screen,
meaning sometimes they’ll have to pull out
all the stops and get really creative with
how they film their scenes. They know they’ve
been successful when viewers walk away wondering
how exactly that one jaw-dropping moment was
captured on film. Here is Screen Rant’s
look at How It Was Shot: 10 Secrets Behind
Amazing Movie Scenes.
Skyfall
The James Bond movies are known for extravagant
action, but this is crazy by even 007 standards.
When pursuing Silva through London’s tube,
the villain tries to take Bond out by crashing
a train through the structure. For safety
reasons, you’d think they’d do this digitally,
but director Sam Mendes went all-out. The
crew built two replica train carriages that
weighed 5-7 tons and dropped them off of a
track raised 20 feet above the Pinewood Studios
set. The model train dismantled a majority
of the sound stage. Digital effects were added
in post, but most of the scene was filmed
practically for maximum effect.
Interstellar
Though viewers remain divided on its story,
there’s no denying that Interstellar is
a technical marvel full of beautiful visuals.
The film made headlines for its limited emphasis
on digital effects, and that includes some
of its other-dimension locations. Towards
the end of the film, Cooper ventures into
the black hole and ends up in a tesseract
where he can communicate with his daughter
Murph. What viewers are seeing is Matthew
McConaughey hanging from a harness, moving
around in an actual set that was constructed.
In a time where green screen is over-used
to fill in environments, it’s refreshing
to see a director go the extra mile.
Independence Day
It’s an iconic shot of 1990s cinema: an
alien ship destroys the White House to send
America into chaos. To accomplish this, director
Roland Emmerich didn’t resort to the digital
effects that were becoming more frequent.
His crew built a 10x5 feet model and spent
a week planning an actual demolition to put
on the screen that needed 40 explosive charges.
When they needed fire to shoot down the streets
of New York, they tilted a model upright beneath
a camera filming downwards to create a rolling
“wall of destruction.” ID4 is known for
its spectacle, and it’s quite impressive.
Speed
One of Speed’s most nail-biting moments
is when a bus has to jump a 50 foot gap in
the incomplete highway. Sounds like a job
for CGI, but the stunt was mostly done for
real. A ramp was built so the bus could get
the necessary lift and only the stunt driver
was in the vehicle – wearing a shock-absorbing
harness to avoid injury. When filming the
scene, the bus traveled further than anyone
anticipated and broke one of the cameras.
Luckily, they got it all on film and the only
digital effect needed was to add in the gap
that’s shown in the final product.
The Matrix
Groundbreaking for several reasons, The Matrix’s
bullet time effects have been parodied endlessly
since 1999, but they weren’t easy to create.
Bullet time scenes were created using a version
of time-slice photography, using temporal
motion to make the shot progress in a slow
motion. Cameras were placed all around an
object and started fractions of a second after
each other to create the slow-mo effect. The
frames together reached a frequency of 12,000
frames per second, as opposed to the usual
24. The Wachowskis did have to use digital
effects – but just to remove the cameras
that were all around.
The Dark Knight
One of the standout set pieces in Christopher
Nolan’s Batman sequel is the car chase through
Gotham City when the Joker attempts to track
down Harvey Dent. What’s even more amazing
is that digital effects were not used for
its two most iconic moments. When the Tumbler
makes its appearance and upends a garbage
truck, what you’re seeing are third scale
models of the Tumbler, the truck, and the
road. At the end of the sequence when the
Joker’s truck flips over, that was accomplished
by building a steam-piston mechanism into
the trailer and actually flipping it in a
closed off street section.
Die Hard
John McClane’s life is a living hell in
the Die Hard franchise, and when shooting
the seminal first film, director John McTiernan
didn’t make things any easier for Bruce
Willis. The crew strived for realism to portray
the film’s high-octane action, meaning most
of what viewers see is real. For a majority
of the exterior shots of Nakatomi showing
explosions, full-scale practical explosions
were set off in and around the actual building.
So when Willis is jumping off rooftops and
desperately trying to break through glass,
he may not even be acting due to what might
happen if it goes wrong.
Gravity
Gravity is one of the most visually-stunning
films ever made, as even some professional
critics thought they filmed it in actual space.
What director Alfonso Cuaron did was shoot
the actors’ faces and filled everything
else in digitally. They had to film the actors
in a way so that the light would match the
all-CGI environment, or else it wouldn’t
look right. To combat this problem, cinematographer
Emmanuel Lubezki folded an LED screen into
a box and suggested filming the actors standing
in the box. That way, the projected image
could move while the actor stayed still, instead
of vice versa. The end result was an Academy
Award.
Return of the Jedi
Before the dawn of CGI, George Lucas had to
resort to old school techniques to make his
galaxy far, far away come to life. In Return
of the Jedi, he originally wanted to shoot
the Luke vs. Rancor fight by placing a performer
in a suit. When those attempts failed, the
crew used a high-speed puppet to film the
creature in his pit. For the moments when
Luke is in its grasp and is about to be eaten,
a Rancor hand prop had to be built so they
could shoot Mark Hamill’s close ups. It
was a second resort, but it paid off in the
end and gave the trilogy one of its most thrilling
moments.
E.T. – The Extra Terrestrial
It’s a magical moment of cinema: E.T. and
the kids going flying in bikes. More than
30 years later, many are still wondering how
that sequence was filmed. According to star
Henry Thomas, it wasn’t as awe-inspiring
as the final product. Bikes were bolted to
the end of a camera crane in a studio and
were dipped and lifted in front of a blue
screen. The environment was added later in
post to create the visual effect that we all
remember. It may not have been exciting to
shoot, but the scene is incredibly convincing
on film, leading several to believe that the
bikes were actually up in the air.
Thanks a lot for watching!
We hope you liked our video!
Which tricks of the trade are your favorites?
Sound off in the comments below and be sure
to click on subscribe for more fun videos
like this one!
Thanks again!